Re-issued under new categorization in August 2009 as Practice Note for Authorized 
Persons, Registered Structural Engineers and Registered Geotechnical Engineers 
APP-108
Buildings Department  
Practice Note for Authorised Persons 
and Registered Structural Engineers 
233 
Dedication of Land/Area for Use as Public Passage 
Purpose 
 
 
 
This practice note sets out the general guidelines on proposals to dedicate 
land or area within a building for use as public passage and the concessions which the 
Building Authority (BA) may grant upon acceptance of such dedication. 
 
Dedications 
 
2. 
 
The BA has the discretionary power to grant concessions in the form of 
exemption of certain floor areas from the gross floor area (GFA) calculations and in the 
form of additional plot ratio and site coverage in exchange for dedication of land or area 
for use as public passage.  Proposals for dedication usually fall into one of the following 
two categories:- 
 
(i) 
Dedication of set back area at street level for the purpose of 
public passage 
 
The permitted site coverage and plot ratio for the building may 
be exceeded to an extent calculated in accordance with Building 
(Planning) Regulations (B(P)R).  The maximum additional plot 
ratio thus approvable is five times the area so dedicated or 20% 
of the permissible plot ratio, whichever is the less.  In addition, 
the BA may exempt areas accepted as dedicated for use as public 
passage from GFA calculations. 
 
(ii) 
Dedication of an area within or through a building at ground 
level or other floor levels for public passage 
 
The BA may in return for this type of dedication allow the 
concessions by way of granting modifications of the relevant 
B(P)R provisions.  The extent of the concessions, which may be 
granted by the BA according to individual merits, ranges from 
exempting the dedicated area from GFA calculations to allowing 
bonus plot ratio and site coverage for the development.  
Normally the bonus site coverage, if allowed, will be equivalent 
to the extent calculated in accordance with B(P)R 22(1).  The 
maximum bonus plot ratio, in terms of additional GFA, 
generally will be at multiples of the dedicated area (five times  for 
dedicated area at ground level and two times for areas at other 
floor levels) subject to the total bonus in return for the dedication 
not to exceed 20% of the permissible plot ratio with the dedicated 
area being exempted from accountable GFA. 
/ General … 

 
- 2 - 
 
 
General Guidelines 
 
3. 
 
To provide a greater degree of certainty to authorized persons and 
developers when they submit applications for concessions in return for dedication of land 
or area within a building for use as public passage, the following guidelines on the 
provision of public passages are provided for general reference. 
 
4. 
 
B(P)R 22(2) provides for additional plot ratio and site coverage in return 
for surrender for the purpose of street widening.  Hence public passages intended for 
street widening shown on town plans or other street improvement plans would be 
considered in the context of B(P)R 22. 
 
5. 
 
Where bonus plot ratio and site coverage are given in return for dedication 
of land for public passage, the resultant development intensity shall not exceed the 
restrictions, if any, stipulated in the statutory town plan unless otherwise provided in the 
said plan. 
 
6. 
 
The Building Authority may accept dedication of land or area within a 
building for public passage if such dedication will lead to: 
 
(a) 
alleviation of congestion problems of vehicular or pedestrian 
traffic on public roads or walkways;  
 
(b) 
linkage with a footbridge/subway or proposed footbridge/ 
subway which is or will be readily accessible to and used by the 
general public, and such linkage would significantly enhance 
public safety or convenience;  
 
(c) 
improvement of road safety or significant enhancement of public 
convenience; or 
 
(d) 
provision of suitable greenery compatible with the use of the 
proposed public passageway. 
 
7. 
 
All applications for dedication should be accompanied by suitable  
justification  to demonstrate that there is a genuine need by the public for such dedication 
and the dedicated areas are reasonable in the circumstances to cater for the need.  In 
general, upon acceptance of a proposed dedication of land or area within a building for 
public passage as desirable, the BA may exempt such land or area from GFA 
calculations.  However, bonus plot ratio and site coverage for the development will only 
be allowed if such dedication is considered to be essential by government, taking into 
account alternative public passages available in the vicinity. 
 
8. 
 
Where the dedicated area within a building serves both the public and the 
users of the building, the amount of exempted GFA and/or bonus GFA will be assessed 
by taking into account the proportion of traffic generated by the public and the users of 
the building. 
 
/ Display … 

 
- 3 - 
 
 
Display of Notices 
 
9. 
 
In all cases, the responsibility for the provision, maintenance and repair of 
the dedication areas will rest with the building owners.  For greater transparency, notices 
advising the public of the dedication of the area for use as public passage, the opening 
hours of such a public passage and the party responsible for the management of the area 
should be displayed in conspicuous locations of the area to the satisfaction of the BA.  
Such responsibility for the display of notices, maintenance and repair will be made a 
condition of dedication. 
  
Deed of Dedication 
 
10. 
 
A temporary occupation permit or an occupation permit will not be issued 
before the execution of a Deed of Dedication incorporating all the relevant terms and 
conditions and until all these terms and conditions have been fullfilled.  APs should 
remind their clients for early preparation and execution of the required Deed.  
( Marco M H WU ) 
Building Authority 
Ref: BD GP/BREG/P/3(III) 
 
First issue  November 1999 
Last revision  December 2002 
This revision  June 2003 (AD/NB1) (General revision)  
 
Index under: Dedication 
 
B(P)Reg 22