Buildings Department 
Practice Note for Authorized Persons, 
Registered Structural Engineers and 
Registered Geotechnical Engineers 
APP-137 
 
 
Ground-borne Vibration and Ground Settlement 
arising from Pile Foundation and Excavation and Lateral Support Works 
 
 
 
Pile driving, boring and withdrawal in foundation works, similar 
operations in excavation and lateral support (ELS) works such as installation or extraction 
of temporary pile walls, collectively known as pile installation works, may cause 
vibrations and settlements.  Improper control of pile installation works may have 
adverse effects on, or cause damage to, adjacent buildings/structures/land/services, in 
particular, non-structural elements therein. 
 
2. 
This practice note aims to provide guidelines on the control of 
ground-borne vibrations and ground settlements arising from pile installation works with 
a view to minimising possible damage to adjacent properties and streets.  Authorized 
persons (AP), registered structural engineers (RSE) and registered geotechnical engineers 
(RGE) are reminded that under the Buildings Ordinance (BO), it is their responsibility to 
ensure that the building works carried out will not impair the stability of, or cause damage 
to any buildings/structures/land/services.  They should also exercise their professional 
judgment in choosing suitable and safe construction methods and provide vigilant 
supervision over the works throughout the construction period. 
 
Pile Foundation Plan and ELS Plan Submissions 
 
3. 
Pile foundation plans and ELS plans submitted for approval should, in 
general, follow the requirements laid down in the Code of Practice for Foundations 2017 
(Foundation Code) and Practice Note for Authorized Persons, Registered Structural 
Engineers and Registered Geotechnical Engineers (PNAP) APP-18.  AP/RSE/RGE’s 
particular attention should be paid to the monitoring requirements and the required 
assessment at clause 7.2 of the Foundation Code for adjacent buildings/structures/land/ 
services in relation to the pile installation works.  Depending on the structural condition 
of the adjacent buildings/structures/land/services, the Building Authority (BA) may 
require the following details to be included in the assessment report:  
 
(a) 
Pre-construction condition survey with a full set of photographic 
record 
of 
the 
external 
and 
common 
areas 
of 
the 
buildings/structures/land/services that are vulnerable to vibration 
and settlement damage.  If access to some internal areas can be 
gained, the condition therein should also be recorded. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
/(b) … 

- 2 - 
 
 
(b) 
Preliminary assessment including a vibration and settlement 
assessment of the stability of the structural and non-structural 
elements of adjacent buildings/structures/land/services under the 
effect of the expected ground-borne vibrations and ground 
settlements.  The assessment should cover the whole course of 
pile installation works setting out clearly the types and duration 
of the major vibration-generating construction activities.   
 
(c) 
Proposed vibration and settlement control limits (with due 
consideration of the recommendations given in Appendix A of 
this practice note) and a monitoring proposal to monitor the 
movements of adjacent grounds and buildings/structures/land/ 
services.  Critical locations for monitoring should be identified 
by RSE/RGE and included in the monitoring proposal. 
     
 
(d) 
If vibration control limits greater than those given in Appendix A 
are to be adopted, a detailed assessment of the magnitude of the 
ground-borne vibrations generated by the pile installation works 
should be made.  Under such circumstances, reference could be 
made to the Foundation Code, BS ISO 4866 1  and Technical  
Note 142 2  published by the Construction Industry Research 
Information Association (CIRIA) 3 of the UK for such assessment 
or to any other relevant references acceptable to the BA.  
Consideration should also be given to the cumulative effects from 
the installation of all piles at the site.  The structural stability of 
all adjacent buildings/structures/land/services due to the effects 
of ground-borne vibrations in item (c) above should also be 
appraised by detailed engineering analyses.  In respect of the 
vibration control of building works carried out within railway 
protection areas, reference should be made to the requirements 
given in Appendix B of PNAP APP-24. 
 
(e) 
If the site is situated close to buildings/structures/land/services 
that are vulnerable to damage caused by the pile installation 
works, a trial pile proposal to validate the accuracy of the 
assessments on the vibration and settlement and the effects of the 
pile installation works on adjacent buildings/structures/land/ 
services (see paragraphs 9, 11 and 12 below).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
/4. … 
 
 
                                            
1  BS ISO 4866 – Mechanical vibration and shock – Vibration of fixed structures – Guidelines 
for the measurement of vibrations and evaluation of their effects on structures. 
2  Technical Note 142 – Ground-borne vibrations arising from pile installation. 
3  The website of CIRIA is http://www.ciria.org. 

- 3 - 
 
 
4. 
It should be noted that certain types of piles installed by 
percussive/vibratory equipment may cause significant damage to vibration sensitive 
buildings/structures/land/services such as those mentioned in clause 7.2.6 of the 
Foundation Code.  Such method will not normally be accepted by the BA unless it can 
be satisfactorily demonstrated to the BA by means of installation of trial pile(s) as 
described below.  Prior to the installation of the trial piles, precautionary measures such 
as the provision of shoring for temporary support to cracked structural members of 
adjacent buildings may need to be provided. 
 
5. 
If site formation plans involve ELS works such as the installation of 
temporary pile walls including steel sheet piles, pipe piles or steel channel plankings, a 
detailed 
vibration 
and 
settlement 
monitoring 
proposal 
on 
all 
adjacent 
buildings/structures/land/services with details described in the above paragraph 3(a) to (d) 
should also be included in the plans to be submitted to the BA for approval.  If the site 
is situated close to buildings/structures/land/services that are vulnerable to damage caused 
by the installation of temporary pile walls, a trial pile proposal as described in the above 
paragraph 3(e) should also be included in the plans for approval.   
 
Required Actions prior to Commencement of Pile Installation Works 
 
6. 
Prior to the commencement of pile installation works, RSE is required to 
confirm with the registered general building contractor (RGBC)/registered specialist 
contractor (RSC) the method of construction including the maximum number of piles to 
be installed concurrently and the relevant details of the construction plants.  
AP/RSE/RGE is also required to fulfill the requirements imposed by other government 
departments.  In case there are changes from the approved details, RSE should submit 
an amendment plan together with a re-assessment of the ground-borne vibrations and 
ground settlements and, if necessary, revise and submit the assessment report for items 
3(b) and (c) above together with the amendment plan. 
 
7. 
To address the concerns of the occupants of adjacent buildings affected by 
the vibrations of pile installation works, AP/RSE/RGE/RGBC/RSC are advised to 
formulate a Public Relations Plan (PR Plan), setting out the actions to be carried out 
before and after the commencement of the pile installations, with reference to clause 7.2.7 
of the Foundation Code.  RSE is advised to submit the PR Plan to the BA for agreement 
prior to the commencement of pile installation works. 
 
Test/Trial Pile(s) for Vibration and Settlement Control 
 
8. 
If the adjacent buildings/structures/land/services are not vulnerable to the 
effects of vibration from the pile installation works, the magnitude of ground-borne 
vibrations and ground settlements as assessed above can be verified during the installation 
of test pile(s).  Ground-borne vibrations should be measured as detailed in paragraph 11 
below and the associated settlements should be recorded upon the completion of the test 
installation.  The effects of the pile installation works on the adjacent buildings/ 
structures/land/services should also be assessed by the RSE/RGE during the installation 
of the test pile(s).  
 
 
 
/9. … 
 

- 4 - 
 
 
9. 
In cases where buildings or structures that are particularly vulnerable to 
the effects of vibration, such as declared monuments or masonry buildings, are in the 
proximity of the pile installation site, RSE/RGE should submit for approval a trial pile 
proposal to confirm the magnitude of ground-borne vibrations and ground settlements as 
assessed above, at each critical ground condition where generation of maximum 
ground-borne vibrations and ground settlements will be expected (usually at the highest 
founding level/obstruction at shallow depth/interbedded strata of rock and soil).  The 
number of such trial pile(s) would depend on the actual site condition in particular for 
very large construction site.   
 
10. 
AP/RSE/RGE will be required, under section 17 of the BO and in 
accordance with the Code of Practice for Site Supervision to provide quality supervision 
of the installation of test/trial piles to ensure the allowable limits of the ground-borne 
vibrations and ground settlements will not be exceeded.  
 
11. 
For the vibration monitoring of test/trial pile installation, the maximum 
ground-borne vibrations, measured in terms of peak particle velocity (ppv), should be 
recorded at every meter length of penetration of pile, at final set and at levels where 
obstructions are encountered.  The maximum ppv should be evaluated at three 
orthogonal axes measured at ground levels of the buildings/structures/land/services in the 
vicinity.  The monitoring readings should be taken by a properly calibrated device under 
the direction of RSE/RGE with the agreement of the BA and the supervision of the 
technically competent persons (TCP) of AP/RSE/RGE/RGBC/RSC’s stream.  If the 
measured ground-borne vibrations have been found to exceed the allowable values or if 
damage to either the structural or non-structural elements of the adjacent 
buildings/structures/land/services has been observed, all pile installation works should be 
ceased and the agreed precautionary measures referred to clause 7.2 of the Foundation 
Code should be reviewed by RSE/RGE.  The suspended pile installation works should 
not be resumed until RSE/RGE’s review report and revision of precautionary measures, 
where necessary, have been submitted to the satisfaction of the BA. 
 
12. 
A condition survey of all adjacent buildings/structures/land/services 
should be carried out after the completion of the trial piles for confirmation of the effects 
of the pile installation works.  Two sets4 of trial pile installation report on ground-borne 
vibrations and ground settlements and their effects on adjacent buildings/structures/land/ 
services should be submitted to the BA for consideration prior to the application for 
consent to the commencement of the installation of the working piles. 
 
Required Actions during the Pile Installation Works 
 
13. 
AP/RSE/RGE should review the site situation from time to time and if 
found necessary, suspend the pile installation works, revise the precautionary measures 
and/or vibration monitoring proposal and submit them to the BA for agreement prior to 
resumption of the works.  Reference should be made to clause 7.2 of the Foundation 
Code.  
 
 
/Enhanced … 
 
                                                 
4  Only one set of trial pile installation report is required if submission is made via BD’s 
Electronic Submission Hub. 

- 5 - 
 
 
Enhanced Control Mechanism 
 
14. 
Clauses 7.2.4 and 7.2.6 of the Foundation Code have set out a system of 
three triggering levels (i.e. Alert, Alarm and Action Levels) as a useful tool for systematic 
monitoring of any settlement and vibration arising from the pile installation works.  With 
a view to enhancing the monitoring of ground and service settlements, as well as the 
response of buildings in vibration, it is advisable to elaborate the system to a five-tier 
system by sub-dividing the third tier Action Level into three sub-levels (i.e. Action Levels 
1, 2 and 3) so that AP/RSE/RGE could step-up actions earlier corresponding to the 
respective trigger values of the Action Levels reached.  The provisional trigger values 
and the recommended contingency measures are given in Appendix A.  
 
Engineering Approach for Assessment of Ground and Services Settlement 
 
15. 
In addition to the adoption of the empirical limits given in the tables of 
Appendix A, RSE/RGE may adopt an engineering approach to establish a set of 
site-specific limits for monitoring, by referring to Appendix C of PNAP APP-24.  The 
site-specific limits for ground and services movement control derived by the engineering 
approach should be subject to the availability of information for conducting the 
engineering assessment and analysis.  Acceptance of the assessment and analysis by the 
relevant government authorities and/or permission of using the site-specific limits from 
the owners of the adjacent buildings/structures/land/services to be affected by the pile 
installation works are required prior to plan approval by the BA on a case-by-case basis.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
( YU Po-mei, Clarice ) 
Building Authority 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ref. :  BD/GP/BREG/C/36 
 
This PNAP is previously known as PNAP 289 
First issue   May 2004 
Last revision October 2018 
This revision  November 2024 (AD/NB2) (General revision) 
 

 
 
Appendix A 
(PNAP APP-137) 
 
 
Recommended Ground Settlement and Ground-borne Vibration Limits  
 
 
Ground Movements  
 
 
Ground movements arising from pile installation works depend on several 
factors including installation or extraction method, construction sequence, sub-soil 
geology, groundwater conditions, layout of the pile installation works and workmanship.  
Excessive ground movements in the vicinity of the pile installation works may be 
detrimental to adjacent buildings or structures with piles of inadequate lateral resistance 
or foundations with inherently low factors of safety, especially those supported by shallow 
foundations. 
 
Tolerable Ground Settlement, Services Settlement and Building Tilting Limits   
 
2. 
As different structures will have different tolerance in accommodating 
movements of their foundations, acceptance of estimated ground settlements should be 
considered on a case-by-case basis with respect to the integrity, stability and functionality 
of the supported structures. 
 
3. 
Provided that there are no particularly sensitive buildings/structures/land/ 
services in the vicinity, the following empirical limits may be taken as the provisional 
trigger values of the Alert, Alarm, Action Levels 1, 2 and 3 (generally referred to as “5A”) 
for the monitoring of pile installation works: 
 
Instrument 
Criterion 
Alert 
Alarm 
Action 
Level 1 
Level 2 
Level 3 
Ground 
settlement 
marker 
Total 
settlement 
12mm 
18mm 
20mm 
22mm 
25mm 
Services 
settlement 
marker 
Total 
settlement and  
angular 
distortion 
12mm 
or 
1:600 
18mm 
or 
1:450 
20mm 
or 
1:400 
22mm 
or 
1:350 
25mm 
or 
1:300 
Building 
tilting marker 
Angular 
distortion 
1:1000 
1:750 
1:600 
1:550 
1:500 
 
 
/Ground-borne … 
 
 
- 1 - 

 
 
Ground-borne Vibration Limits 
4. 
Similarly, in the absence of an engineering analysis on the response of 
vibration for buildings in the vicinity, the following empirical limits with the provisional 
5A trigger values may be used for reference: 
 
Building 
Condition 
Guide Values of Maximum ppv 
(mm/sec) 
Transient Vibration 
(eg. drop hammer) 
Continuous Vibration 
(eg. vibratory hammer) 
Alert Alarm 
Action 
Alert Alarm 
Action 
Level 
1 
Level 
2 
Level 
3 
Level 
1 
Level 
2 
Level 3 
Robust and 
stable 
buildings 
in general 
9 
12 
13 
14 
15 
4.5 
6 
6.5 
7 
7.5 
Vibration-
sensitive/ 
dilapidated 
buildings 
4.5 
6 
6.5 
7 
7.5 
1.8 
2.4 
2.6 
2.8 
3 
 
5. 
The recommended contingency measures for exceedance of the triggering 
levels are listed as follows: 
 
Triggering 
Level 
Contingency Measures 
Alert 
The monitoring should be enhanced by increasing the frequency of 
monitoring measurements and the number of check points. 
Alarm 
The method of installation of the piles should be reviewed with the 
purpose of mitigating the detrimental effects arising from vibration 
or ground settlement. 
Action Level 1 
 
A joint site inspection by AP/RSE/RGE/RGBC/RSC and relevant 
stakeholders should be carried out.  RSE/RGE should check the 
stability and serviceability of the affected buildings/structures/land/ 
services.  AP/RSE/RGE should propose and implement necessary 
remedial works after consulting the relevant stakeholders. 
/Action Level 2 … 
- 2 - 

 
 
Action Level 2 
RGBC/RSC should immediately notify the AP/RSE/RGE, 
relevant authorities and relevant stakeholders.  A detailed 
investigation, and checking the stability and serviceability of the 
affected buildings/structures/land/services should be conducted by 
RGBC/RSC.  A joint site inspection should be carried out by 
AP/RSE/RGE/RGBC/RSC.  RSE/RGE should review, and 
revise, if necessary, the design and method statements for the pile 
installation or the works likely to have induced the trigger values. 
Action Level 3 
The 
corresponding 
site 
works 
should 
be 
suspended. 
Construction activities should not be resumed until the necessary 
remedial and preventive measures have been completed 
satisfactorily. 
 
6.  
The “Action Level 3” contingency measures should be taken if any of the 
following situations occurs: 
 
(a) 
Any monitoring station has a reading reaching the specific 
trigger value based on serviceability limit1, or in the absence 
of such engineering assessment, the provisional trigger value 
for Action Level 3 is reached, whichever is applicable; 
 
(b) 
Undue settlement as indicated in any check points (e.g. an 
increase of 5mm between two consecutive daily readings); or 
 
(c) 
Sign of distress or damages is observed in any adjacent 
buildings/structures/land/services. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(11/2024) 
                                                 
1  Serviceability limit is defined as the maximum calculated movements estimated in the design 
or the maximum allowable movement or response of the adjacent ground, groundwater regime, 
structures and services. 
 
- 3 -